README.md, before:

# unity-gettext-lang-manager

Unity implementation of the NGettext library

![unity-gettext-lang-manager](./Res/screenshot.gif)

Unity3d project for language handling, based on gettext which is the GNU internationalisation library (i18n). It is commonly used to write programs with multilingual interfaces.

For this I have used NGettext A cross-platform .NET implementation of the GNU / Gettext library. (https://github.com/VitaliiTsilnyk/NGettext)

The versatility of this project lies in being able to apply multi-language to both the TeshMeshPro component and the standard Unity Text, being easily extendable to any kind of component. In addition, a very important point is being able to manage languages with tools such as #Poedit.

It also allows you to assign materials at runtime with which you can make any kind of #WordArt.


### Asign Font charset to SDF FONTS

Al crear los mapas de caracteres en tiempo de ejecución nos evitamos la necesidad de crear una fuente SDF, con el charset de cada pais.

Obviamente esto tiene un coste en memoria y rendimiento, pero en aplicaciones que necesiten un multilenguaje muy avanzado será necesario implementar algo así.

En esta página se puede encontrar las referencias para cada idioma, Character Code Charts http://unicode.org/charts/

## NGettext 

A cross-platform .NET implementation of the GNU/Gettext library.

This fully managed library works fine on **Microsoft .NET Framework** version 2.0 or higher, **Mono** and **.NET Core** even on full-AOT runtimes.
It is fully **COM** and **CLS** compatible.

This implementation loads translations directly from gettext *.mo files (no need to compile a satellite assembly) and can handle multiple translation domains and multiple locales in one application instance.
NGettext supports both little-endian and big-endian MO files, automatic (header-based) encoding detection and (optional) plural form rules parsing.

By default, NGettext uses pre-compiled plural form rules for most known locales.
You can enable plural form rule parsing from *.mo file headers (see `MoCompilingPluralLoader` description below) 
or use a custom plural rules passed to your Catalog instance through API.

### Why NGettext?


There are other GNU/Gettext implementations for C#, but they all have some huge disadvantages.

**Why not Mono.Unix.Catalog?**
Mono's Catalog is just a bindings to three native functions (bindtextdomain, gettext, and ngettext). It does not support multiple domains/locales and contexts. It is not cross-patform, it have problems with Windows OS.


**Why not GNU.Gettext?**
It uses satellite assemblies as a translation files and does not support multiple locales in one application instance.
It's hard to build and maintain translation files and change locale inside your application.

**So why NGettext?**
* NGettext is fully cross-platform as it doesn't use any native or managed 3rd-party libraries.
* NGettext supports multiple domains. You can separate translation files for each of your application's module or plugin.
* NGettext supports multiple locales in one application instance and gives really simple API to choose locale of your application.
  You don't even need to care about locales of your application's threads.
* NGettext loads translations from *.mo files. You can even load translations from specified file or stream.
* NGettext supports message contexts.
* NGettext provides nice and simple API, compatible with any type of application (console, GUI, web...).

Installation and usage
----------------------

All you need to do is just install a [NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NGettext/)
from the package manager console:
```
PM> Install-Package NGettext
```
or through .NET CLI utility:
```
$ dotnet add package NGettext
```

Now you can use NGettext in your code:
```csharp
	using NGettext;
```
```csharp
	// This will load translations from "./locale/<CurrentUICulture>/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog("Example", "./locale");
	
	// or
	
	// This will load translations from "./locale/ru_RU/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog("Example", "./locale", new CultureInfo("ru-RU"));
```
```csharp
	Console.WriteLine(catalog.GetString("Hello, World!")); // will translate "Hello, World!" using loaded translations
	Console.WriteLine(catalog.GetString("Hello, {0}!", "World")); // String.Format support
```

### .NET CoreCLR

If you using this library under CoreCLR and you want to use encodings different from UTF-8 for your *.mo files, you need to include [System.Text.Encoding.CodePages](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Text.Encoding.CodePages/) package into your application and initialize it like this:
```csharp
	#if NETCOREAPP1_0
		Encoding.RegisterProvider(CodePagesEncodingProvider.Instance);
	#endif
```


### Culture-specific message formatting

```csharp
	// All translation methods support String.Format optional arguments
	catalog.GetString("Hello, {0}!", "World");
	
	// Catalog's current locale will be used to format messages correctly
	catalog.GetString("Here's a number: {0}!", 1.23);
	// Will return "Here's a number: 1.23!" for en_US locale
	// But something like this will be returned for ru_RU locale with Russian translation: "А вот и номер: 1,23!"
```



### Plural forms

```csharp
	catalog.GetPluralString("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", count);
	// Returns (for en_US locale):
	//     "You have {0} apple." for count = 1
	//     "You have {0} apples." otherwise


	catalog.GetPluralString("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", 5, 5);
	// Returns translated plural massage: "You have 5 apples." (for en_US locale)
	// First “5” used in plural forms determination; second — in String.Format method


	// Example plural forms usage for fractional numbers:
	catalog.GetPluralString("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", (long)1.23, 1.23);
	// Internal String.Format will be used in context of catalog's locale and formats objects respectively
```



### Contexts

```csharp
	catalog.GetParticularString("Menu|File|", "Open"); // will translate message "Open" using context "Menu|File|"
	catalog.GetParticularString("Menu|Project|", "Open"); // will translate message "Open" using context "Menu|Project|"
```



### Multiple locales and domains in one application instance

```csharp
	// "./locale/en_US/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog example_en = new Catalog("Example", "./locale", new CultureInfo("en-US"));

	// "./locale/fr/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog example_fr = new Catalog("Example", "./locale", new CultureInfo("fr"));

	// "./locale/<CurrentUICulture>/LC_MESSAGES/AnotherDomainName.mo"
	ICatalog anotherDomain = new Catalog("AnotherDomainName", "./locale");
```



### Direct MO file loading

```csharp
	Stream moFileStream = File.OpenRead("path/to/domain.mo");
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog(moFileStream, new CultureInfo("en-US"));
```



### Parsing plural rules from the *.mo file header

NGettext can parse plural rules directly from the *.mo file header and compile it to a dynamic method in runtime.
To enable this option you can just create a catalog using the `MoCompilingPluralLoader` from the [NGettext.PluralCompile](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NGettext.PluralCompile) package:
```csharp
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog(new MoCompilingPluralLoader("Example", "./locale"));
```
This loader will parse plural formula from the *.mo file header and compile it to plural rule for 
your Catalog instance at runtime, just when your *.mo file loads.
Your Catalog's *PluralString methods performance will be the same as if you were using NGettext's default precompiled plural rules, 
only *.mo file loading will be slightly slower.

This feature requires enabled JIT compiler in your runtime. You can not use MoCompilingPluralLoader in an full-AOT environment.
This is why MoCompilingPluralLoader moved to a separate library.

For hosts without enabled JIT you can use `MoAstPluralLoader` which will only parse plural formulas to an abstract syntax tree
and interpret it every time you call a *PluralString method from your catalog, without compiling.
Please note that this solution is slightly slower than MoCompilingPluralLoader even it's pretty well optimized.



### Custom plural formulas

```csharp
	catalog.PluralRule = new PluralRule(numPlurals, n => ( n == 1 ? 0 : 1 ));
```
Also you can create custom plural rule generator by implementing IPluralRuleGenerator interface, which will create
a PluralRule for any culture.



Debugging
---------

Debug version of the NGettext binary outputs debug messages to System.Diagnostics.Trace.
You can register trace listeners to see NGettext debug messages.
Please note that Release version of the NGettext binary does not produse any trace messages.

```csharp
	Trace.Listeners.Add(new TextWriterTraceListener(Console.Out));
```



Shorter syntax
--------------

In `doc/examples/T.cs` you can see an example of shorter syntax creation for NGettext:
```csharp
	T._("Hello, World!"); // GetString
	T._n("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", count, count); // GetPluralString
	T._p("Context", "Hello, World!"); // GetParticularString
	T._pn("Context", "You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", count, count); // GetParticularPluralString
```



Poedit compatibility
--------------------

For [Poedit](http://www.poedit.net/) compatibility, you need to specify plural form in your *.pot file header, even for english language:
```
	"Plural-Forms: nplurals=2; plural=n != 1;\n"
```

And a keywords list:
```
	"X-Poedit-KeywordsList: GetString;GetPluralString:1,2;GetParticularString:1c,2;GetParticularPluralString:1c,2,3;_;_n:1,2;_p:1c,2;_pn:1c,2,3\n"
```

Commit message:

Add arabic support, add ui dinamic language buttons

README.md, after:

# unity-gettext-lang-manager

Unity implementation of the NGettext library

![unity-gettext-lang-manager](./Res/screenshot.gif)

Unity3d project for language handling, based on gettext which is the GNU internationalisation library (i18n). It is commonly used to write programs with multilingual interfaces.

For this I have used NGettext A cross-platform .NET implementation of the GNU / Gettext library. (https://github.com/VitaliiTsilnyk/NGettext)

The versatility of this project lies in being able to apply multi-language to both the TeshMeshPro component and the standard Unity Text, being easily extendable to any kind of component. In addition, a very important point is being able to manage languages with tools such as #Poedit.

It also allows you to assign materials at runtime with which you can make any kind of WordArt.

Language flags code based on https://github.com/siberder/UnityCountryFlags

Icons Flags from https://github.com/hampusborgos/country-flags

### TODO

- Custom font by language
- Data json configure custom font
- Data json define rtl languages
- Add more public fonts 

### Arabic Support

Initially the correct approach is to use TeshMeshPro's RTL support, but this contains errors when interpreting Arabic words. To solve this problem, we have opted for Abdullah Al-Imam's ArabicSupport library, https://github.com/AbdullahAlimam/Arabic-Support-for-Unity-UI, which seems to have all the necessary corrections to support the Arabic language, without the need to use RTL.


### Asign Font charset to SDF FONTS

By creating the character maps at runtime we avoid the need to create an SDF font, with the charset of each country.

Obviously this has a cost in memory and performance, but in applications that need a very advanced multilanguage it will be necessary to implement something like this.

In this page you can find the references for each language, Character Code Charts http://unicode.org/charts/

## What is NGettext?

A cross-platform .NET implementation of the GNU/Gettext library.

This fully managed library works fine on **Microsoft .NET Framework** version 2.0 or higher, **Mono** and **.NET Core** even on full-AOT runtimes.
It is fully **COM** and **CLS** compatible.

This implementation loads translations directly from gettext *.mo files (no need to compile a satellite assembly) and can handle multiple translation domains and multiple locales in one application instance.
NGettext supports both little-endian and big-endian MO files, automatic (header-based) encoding detection and (optional) plural form rules parsing.

By default, NGettext uses pre-compiled plural form rules for most known locales.
You can enable plural form rule parsing from *.mo file headers (see `MoCompilingPluralLoader` description below) 
or use a custom plural rules passed to your Catalog instance through API.

### Why NGettext?


There are other GNU/Gettext implementations for C#, but they all have some huge disadvantages.

**Why not Mono.Unix.Catalog?**
Mono's Catalog is just a bindings to three native functions (bindtextdomain, gettext, and ngettext). It does not support multiple domains/locales and contexts. It is not cross-patform, it have problems with Windows OS.


**Why not GNU.Gettext?**
It uses satellite assemblies as a translation files and does not support multiple locales in one application instance.
It's hard to build and maintain translation files and change locale inside your application.

**So why NGettext?**
* NGettext is fully cross-platform as it doesn't use any native or managed 3rd-party libraries.
* NGettext supports multiple domains. You can separate translation files for each of your application's module or plugin.
* NGettext supports multiple locales in one application instance and gives really simple API to choose locale of your application.
  You don't even need to care about locales of your application's threads.
* NGettext loads translations from *.mo files. You can even load translations from specified file or stream.
* NGettext supports message contexts.
* NGettext provides nice and simple API, compatible with any type of application (console, GUI, web...).

Installation and usage
----------------------

All you need to do is just install a [NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NGettext/)
from the package manager console:
```
PM> Install-Package NGettext
```
or through .NET CLI utility:
```
$ dotnet add package NGettext
```

Now you can use NGettext in your code:
```csharp
	using NGettext;
```
```csharp
	// This will load translations from "./locale/<CurrentUICulture>/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog("Example", "./locale");
	
	// or
	
	// This will load translations from "./locale/ru_RU/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog("Example", "./locale", new CultureInfo("ru-RU"));
```
```csharp
	Console.WriteLine(catalog.GetString("Hello, World!")); // will translate "Hello, World!" using loaded translations
	Console.WriteLine(catalog.GetString("Hello, {0}!", "World")); // String.Format support
```

### .NET CoreCLR

If you using this library under CoreCLR and you want to use encodings different from UTF-8 for your *.mo files, you need to include [System.Text.Encoding.CodePages](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Text.Encoding.CodePages/) package into your application and initialize it like this:
```csharp
	#if NETCOREAPP1_0
		Encoding.RegisterProvider(CodePagesEncodingProvider.Instance);
	#endif
```


### Culture-specific message formatting

```csharp
	// All translation methods support String.Format optional arguments
	catalog.GetString("Hello, {0}!", "World");
	
	// Catalog's current locale will be used to format messages correctly
	catalog.GetString("Here's a number: {0}!", 1.23);
	// Will return "Here's a number: 1.23!" for en_US locale
	// But something like this will be returned for ru_RU locale with Russian translation: "А вот и номер: 1,23!"
```



### Plural forms

```csharp
	catalog.GetPluralString("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", count);
	// Returns (for en_US locale):
	//     "You have {0} apple." for count = 1
	//     "You have {0} apples." otherwise


	catalog.GetPluralString("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", 5, 5);
	// Returns translated plural massage: "You have 5 apples." (for en_US locale)
	// First “5” used in plural forms determination; second — in String.Format method


	// Example plural forms usage for fractional numbers:
	catalog.GetPluralString("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", (long)1.23, 1.23);
	// Internal String.Format will be used in context of catalog's locale and formats objects respectively
```



### Contexts

```csharp
	catalog.GetParticularString("Menu|File|", "Open"); // will translate message "Open" using context "Menu|File|"
	catalog.GetParticularString("Menu|Project|", "Open"); // will translate message "Open" using context "Menu|Project|"
```



### Multiple locales and domains in one application instance

```csharp
	// "./locale/en_US/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog example_en = new Catalog("Example", "./locale", new CultureInfo("en-US"));

	// "./locale/fr/LC_MESSAGES/Example.mo"
	ICatalog example_fr = new Catalog("Example", "./locale", new CultureInfo("fr"));

	// "./locale/<CurrentUICulture>/LC_MESSAGES/AnotherDomainName.mo"
	ICatalog anotherDomain = new Catalog("AnotherDomainName", "./locale");
```



### Direct MO file loading

```csharp
	Stream moFileStream = File.OpenRead("path/to/domain.mo");
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog(moFileStream, new CultureInfo("en-US"));
```



### Parsing plural rules from the *.mo file header

NGettext can parse plural rules directly from the *.mo file header and compile it to a dynamic method in runtime.
To enable this option you can just create a catalog using the `MoCompilingPluralLoader` from the [NGettext.PluralCompile](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NGettext.PluralCompile) package:
```csharp
	ICatalog catalog = new Catalog(new MoCompilingPluralLoader("Example", "./locale"));
```
This loader will parse plural formula from the *.mo file header and compile it to plural rule for 
your Catalog instance at runtime, just when your *.mo file loads.
Your Catalog's *PluralString methods performance will be the same as if you were using NGettext's default precompiled plural rules, 
only *.mo file loading will be slightly slower.

This feature requires enabled JIT compiler in your runtime. You can not use MoCompilingPluralLoader in an full-AOT environment.
This is why MoCompilingPluralLoader moved to a separate library.

For hosts without enabled JIT you can use `MoAstPluralLoader` which will only parse plural formulas to an abstract syntax tree
and interpret it every time you call a *PluralString method from your catalog, without compiling.
Please note that this solution is slightly slower than MoCompilingPluralLoader even it's pretty well optimized.



### Custom plural formulas

```csharp
	catalog.PluralRule = new PluralRule(numPlurals, n => ( n == 1 ? 0 : 1 ));
```
Also you can create custom plural rule generator by implementing IPluralRuleGenerator interface, which will create
a PluralRule for any culture.



Debugging
---------

Debug version of the NGettext binary outputs debug messages to System.Diagnostics.Trace.
You can register trace listeners to see NGettext debug messages.
Please note that Release version of the NGettext binary does not produse any trace messages.

```csharp
	Trace.Listeners.Add(new TextWriterTraceListener(Console.Out));
```



Shorter syntax
--------------

In `doc/examples/T.cs` you can see an example of shorter syntax creation for NGettext:
```csharp
	T._("Hello, World!"); // GetString
	T._n("You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", count, count); // GetPluralString
	T._p("Context", "Hello, World!"); // GetParticularString
	T._pn("Context", "You have {0} apple.", "You have {0} apples.", count, count); // GetParticularPluralString
```



Poedit compatibility
--------------------

For [Poedit](http://www.poedit.net/) compatibility, you need to specify plural form in your *.pot file header, even for english language:
```
	"Plural-Forms: nplurals=2; plural=n != 1;\n"
```

And a keywords list:
```
	"X-Poedit-KeywordsList: GetString;GetPluralString:1,2;GetParticularString:1c,2;GetParticularPluralString:1c,2,3;_;_n:1,2;_p:1c,2;_pn:1c,2,3\n"
```
